+++
date = "2017-06-20T10:03:18-04:00"
title = "Net Neutrality"
draft = false

+++

*I wrote this in 2016. The situation in Canada has changed for the better in recent months. In America the situation has grown worse.*

The future of the internet will be decided in a debate over the identity of Internet Service Providers (ISPs). On one side, the ISPs remain as their name describes, service providers and passive members in the functioning of the internet. On the other side, the ISPs reposition themselves as "content providers" and active members in the functioning of the internet, effectively, middle-men. The former side is a neutral net, while the later side is a non-neutral net, a net of privilege.

This is the great debate over net neutrality. Its outcome either secures the principal of the internet as it stands today or rewrites the DNA of the internet into something far worse. Yet, maintaining net neutrality faces problems. I'm shocked by how people either a) don't understand the net neutrality debate, b) haven't heard about net neutrality, or worst of all, c) don't care about net neutrality. This piece aims to fix these problems. It will explain net neutrality, move through reasons why net neutrality must be protected and the warning signs of its violation, and justify why maintaining net neutrality is fundamentally necessary. 

## What is Net Neutrality?

The simple answer: it's the internet as it exists today. All sites on the internet are neutral and on an equal playing field. Regardless of the size of the organization, business, or service, if you enter an address in the address bar you can visit that website. This is the guiding principle of the internet, it's philosophy as a distributed network of accessible information. You pay for connection to the internet and then you receive the internet, no middle-men.

The problem, though, is that this idea is under attack in numerous ways and on numerous fronts. But, to begin, I'll explain to you what the opposite of net neutrality will look like. A number of metaphors to explain this idea come to mind. Later, I will return these ideas to the internet.

#### Scuba

Let's say you want to go scuba diving. You go to scuba school and you now know how to scuba dive. You rent scuba gear, a mask, a tank, and flippers, from Company **B** and set off sinking to the bottom of the ocean. Now, let's say when you reach the bottom you see a sign that reads: To move and see the ocean you must pay Company **B** more. Even worse, to resurface will cost you extra too. This is preposterous, you think: you have paid for the access to the ocean by renting the scuba gear so why should you now need to pay Company **B** again is if they are providing the content of the ocean to you if you already have the ability to freely swim in the ocean with your scuba gear? Company **B** has violated ocean neutrality.

#### Theme Park

Let's say you want to go to theme park **A** and ride the rides. You and your friends walk up to the entrance and pay the exorbitant rate theme parks cost to get access to the rides. As you walk through the park you see food for sale, and you think that is fine because what you paid for already is the rides and access to the rides. Then you and your friends walk up to the line of a rollercoaster and see that theme park **A** is charging for access to the individual rides *on top of* your initial cost to access the rides. **A** wants you to pay for access and pay for the content too. Even worse, certain rides cost more than others. Theme park **A** has broken the principal of ride neutrality.

#### The Internet and Net Neutrality

Now, these metaphors are not perfect, but they illustrate what a violation of net neutrality would look like: middle-men and price hierarchies.

Let's bring this back to the internet to show you what a non-neutral net looks like. Let's say you want to go on social network **F** but you don't have access to the internet. So, you call up your local ISP **Z** (as I will discuss later, in Canada "local" is a bit of a misnomer, they rent their connection from the national providers), and get access to the internet for 35$/month. You start up your computer, get your modem and WIFI set up, and then type in social network **F**'s address into your browser and BOOM, through the power of the internet, you are now on **F** with all your friends.

Now let's say you've also heard about streaming site **N**, and you want to visit this website too. Beforehand, you also subscribe to **N** to access their content. So, you type in the address and hit enter but instead of your site of choice you get a screen with a message that says: "This website is not in your package, you must pay 5$ to gain access."

You are, I would hope, irate. You have already paid for *access* to the internet and now you have to pay that same company for the *content*. You are already paying for your subscription to streaming site **N** and now ISP **Z** wants to be the middleman on that too.

This is the state of the internet without net neutrality. Neutrality ensures that all websites on the net are treated evenly, equally, and fairly. Without neutrality, we end up with a similar package system that has gutted cable TV into a husk of what was promised.

## The Big Problems of a Non-Neutral Net

Hopefully, the previous discussion of a non-neutral net has cleared up why net neutrality matters to you and your wallet. Now, I want you to think about everyone else and the health of the internet. Without net neutrality, the incredible health and thriving innovation of the internet grind to a halt.

One of my favourite things about the internet is the surprise that comes when you find something new, something bizarre and left field, or something that changes how you view and interact with everyday things.

Before the internet, the ability to disrupt an industry or create a game-changing product took a massive amount of capital and incredible luck. While this is partially as true today as it was then, today it's start-ups with bold ideas and on minimal budgets using the internet to change the world. They are able to do this because, right from their inception, on the internet, their website and content are neutral to their competitors. A consumer can access either one by putting in the address or coming across a link in a moment of intrigue.

But without neutrality, this all grinds to a halt. Let's say startup **G** has created a bold new video streaming site to combat established streaming site **Y**. You begin hosting your website and content and waiting for viewers. No one comes. Then, after a week of no one you get a call from ISP **B**. They want you to join one of their packages to be sold to consumers. The kicker: to do that startup **G** needs to pay the ISP for people to get access to your content. Now your competitor, **Y**, is much bigger, more established, has more users, and more demand, so it's in a different, more basic package and, as a result, this package *costs less* to the consumer. In the other direction, the ISP charges **Y** more to be in this package precisely because it's successful and has more users.

At this point you are probably screaming at the ISP, "but don't you see, without more viewers, we can't be more successful, we can't compete with **Y** to gain entry into their more basic package! You are killing our business, and then saying it's our business's fault!" But the ISP doesn't care, they are the middle-men, they control access and content. They control the competition, the winners, and the losers.

Even worse, without net neutrality, there is no incentive to improve the quality of the access to the content; the incentive is only profits and the quality of the content. As middle-men, they have no incentive beyond maintaining the status quo and playing the businesses and consumers for a lark. This is a key distinction to keep in mind as we continue.

This is the internet without net neutrality. This is an internet dictated by the privileged, the establishment, and the gate-keepers, big business and limited competition. This is a far cry from the internet of neutrality we have today where the success of a business is determined less by an ISP's whim than by the success of the product a business offers.

## How Do We Stop This?

We need to protect net neutrality at all cost. Far from a novelty or something tangential to our day to day life, the internet is now fundamental to how we live. Some countries, like Finland, have gone so far as to make access to the internet a human right. The internet is a public necessity and a public utility; maintaining net neutrality is a public good.

Ideally, net neutrality would be codified in law. But in a number of places, including Canada, this has been slow going and faces a constant assault from those who seek a non-neutral net.

The core matter is that ISPs are desperate to not seem like dumb tubes. They want to reposition themselves at all cost as content providers. They believe that they control the ability to charge for the content, a product that was already created by a business, that runs through their tubes and reaches the consumer, a consumer that has already paid for access to this tube. They believe they can be middle-men taking profits from both ends.

They argue for this position because establishing and building the infrastructure for the internet was expensive. So prohibitively expensive that no one else can do it now, at least not without an enormous capital investment. In economics, this situation is called a "natural monopoly". The initial infrastructure was built at such cost and at such market penetration that there is little to no competition. Currently, the internet is in this situation. Sure, people can "make" their own internet, but it's not the same as gaining access to the larger distributed network that the ISPs own and protect at all cost.

This is common with public utilities like electricity and telephones. Could you imagine if every house had to have competing electrical and telephone lines set up? In fact, early on we did have that. Thousands of lines streamed across cities competing against one another. But it was unsustainable, and not to mention a massive pain in the ass for the public. As a result, regulations were put in place to limit the predatory practice of one company over all others. Electrical lines and phone lines were converted into *common carriers*.

Classification as a common carrier terrifies ISPs because it would codify them in law as simple tubes rather than content providers. As common carriers, they provide a service, access to the internet, and that's it. Their job at that point would be to maintain the network, improve the network, and expand the network. Their job would not be to improve the content, it would be to improve *access to the content*. ISPs will fight against this status with tooth and nail.

The fight has been long fought in North America, most dramatically in the USA. For numerous years, ISPs in the states have secured privileged rights to operate with near-monopoly control in certain areas they built the infrastructure for. Depending on where you live you potentially have only one option for an ISP and the service has, predictably, in those areas been awful. I would venture that consumer complaints about ISP practices outweigh all other complaints in the US for vitriol and sheer exasperation.

After a long fight, however, on February 26th, 2015, the Federal Communications Commission (FCC), the government body that regulates telecommunications and the internet in the USA, [adopted strong Open Internet rules which classified ISPs in the USA under rules of Title II](https://www.fcc.gov/general/open-internet), in other words, it designated ISPs as common carriers. There are three main rules now in play:

>1. No Blocking: broadband providers may not block access to legal content, applications, services, or non-harmful devices.

>2. No Throttling: broadband providers may not impair or degrade lawful Internet traffic on the basis of content, applications, services, or non-harmful devices.

>3. No Paid Prioritization: broadband providers may not favour some lawful Internet traffic over other lawful traffic in exchange for consideration of any kind—in other words, no "fast lanes." This rule also bans ISPs from prioritising content and services of their affiliates.

Another key statute is that these rules mean competitors are allowed to access the ISPs network to offer their own services, [what are known as "interconnection agreements", so long as they do not harm competition and consumers.](http://arstechnica.com/tech-policy/2016/06/net-neutrality-and-title-ii-win-in-court-as-isps-lose-case-against-fcc/)

ISPs appealed these rules to the US Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit and lost their appeal on June 6th of this year. Most of all, ISPs appealed the decision from the FCC that they were not an "information service" but telecommunications first and foremost and therefore subject to the stricter common carrier regulation of Title II. The judges from the Court of Appeals disagreed.
["Judges were not persuaded by industry arguments that Internet service is unambiguously an 'information service' rather than a 'telecommunications service' subject to stricter regulation. The industry argument ignores that the statutory definition of information service says that 'such services are provided 'via telecommunications,'' the judges wrote."](http://arstechnica.com/tech-policy/2016/06/net-neutrality-and-title-ii-win-in-court-as-isps-lose-case-against-fcc/)

"Information services" here is a weasel word for "content providers." The ISPs believed that they owned and could charge for the very information that transferred through their tubes rather than just access to that information as a telecommunications service and a common carrier.

The ISPs have appealed the case to the supreme court, but until that ruling, they are common carriers and must act as such.

To put this in terms of the everyday internet user, the FCC and these judges agreed that when you use Netflix to watch a movie or a TV show you pay the ISPs for access to the distributed network that Netflix is also a part of. You are not paying the ISPs for access to Netflix. When you subscribe you are paying for access to Netflix. When you pay the ISPs you are paying for access to their tube and may use that tube as you see fit subject to regulations and laws. Netflix is a content provider, and your ISP is a service provider.

Where the USA has acted with legislative and judicial authority, Canada has been less than active on the topic of net neutrality. The state of internet in Canada is frankly abysmal. We pay sky-high rates for speeds that are middling at best and feature data caps that bring the rest of the world to laughter. Throttling is rampant.

Much of the blame can be placed squarely at the Duopoly of Rogers and Bell who control telecommunications in the East, and to a lesser degree, Telus and Shaw who control the West, and on the Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission (CRTC), which is, in the words of Micheal Geist, [largely ineffectual](http://www.michaelgeist.ca/2011/07/net-neutrality-enforcement-fail/). Often the CRTC can barely even muster up an investigation, in that absence, they turn to a stern phone call.

There are some positive signs on the horizon, though. For one thing, recently the CRTC ruled that [Bell and other ISPs had to allow competitors access to their fibre networks](http://www.cbc.ca/news/technology/bell-appeal-bains-1.3577044) and the courts recently squashed an appeal from Bell on the ruling. For a number of years, the claim has been that infrastructure development for ISPs is prohibitively hard in Canada because of the size of Canada. But this ignores that the landmass of Canada is irrelevant. People don't live everywhere in Canada, in fact, 90% of the country lives within 100 km of our border with the US. This is an argument designed to pull the focus away from their lack of real investment in improving their *service* towards their supposed actions as "*content*" providers. One hopes that the court ruling points to the CRTC finally seeing through this sham. Geist has also suggested that with a new majority mandate in place the ruling Liberal party has, in the coming years, [ample opportunity to make positive additions](http://www.michaelgeist.ca/2015/10/real-change-on-digital-policy-may-take-time-under-new-liberal-government/) to the enforcement of net neutrality in Canada.

But before that, we will need to deal with the laws we have in place now. The biggest offence being Usage Based Billing (UBB). In Canada, we have data caps that are absurdly small. In 2016 there is no reason a family should only have 100 Gb for a month when much of the content on the web that is popular, streaming, in particular, eats through data caps like a hot dog eating champion during the 4th of July. Even worse the penalties for going over the data caps are absurdly out of line when compared to the actual cost of the internet. A Gb over your data cap for Rogers can be as much as 2$ added to your bill, an absurdly out of proportion addition when compared to the cost of your initial bill and [when the actual per transit cost of a Gb is roughly 10-12 cents](http://www.theglobeandmail.com/news/technology/gadgets-and-gear/hugh-thompson/what-is-a-fair-price-for-internet-service/article1890596/). 

It's particularly telling when a representative for Bell suggests, ["Our position on network diversity/neutrality is that it should be determined by market forces, not regulation,"](http://www.cbc.ca/news/technology/battle-over-net-neutrality-arrives-in-canada-1.619489) which is to say that Bell doesn't want net neutrality. Why does Bell claim it has faith in the market, and then contest allowing competitors to access its fibre network? Because in Canada, we lack a real competitive market for ISPs. Rogers and Bell in the east barely compete because there is no incentive to, and so they can focus on charging near identical rates without putting effort into improving their service.

### We Must Therefore Be Vigilant

In the face of the increasing mergers of distributors, service providers, and content producers, we must be vigilant to protect the neutrality of the net. We must not succumb to violations of net neutrality in disguise. By disguise I mean the allowing of "zero-rating" which allows certain services to not count towards your data cap. This is a non-neutral net as ISPs privilege certain services and websites over others. In the USA, the FCC is currently reviewing the rules on this practice, while in Canada, [there are already lawsuits *between* ISPs in play for this practice.](http://www.huffingtonpost.ca/2015/10/16/canadian-telecoms-clash-over-videotron-s-wireless-music-streaming-package_n_8315432.html) Let's call this *positive non-neutrality* because at first glance it seems like a good thing; however, what this does is cement in the middleman role of the ISPs. We must not let a privilege that benefits ourselves seem like a good for the public when it's not. Any violation of net neutrality, even if it seems positive, is a violation nonetheless.

Beyond positive non-neutrality, we must also be vigilant to stop the massive mergers which are becoming more common in the telecommunications world between ISPs and content producers. Already we have seen in the last years massive mergers, with the latest proposed one between AT&T and Time Warner in the States, while in Canada our media is increasingly being consolidated under the massive giants Bell Media, Rogers, Shaw, Newcap, and Quebecor. There is a stunning lack of independent media ownership in Canada, most prominently in New Brunswick where the Irving business empire practically controls all the news and print content in the province. Increasingly too, according to a report released by the Canadian Senate in 2005, [the CRTC has been ineffective at stopping or even slowing these mergers.](http://www.parl.gc.ca/Content/SEN/Committee/391/TRAN/rep/repfinjun06vol1-e.htm)

What these mergers mean is a homogenizing of content and services; a stagnant market with little innovation. With a lack of competition as monopolies form, the businesses turn from providing a service to extracting rents as they arbitrarily control access to media. Worse, you at home on your TV and your computer no longer become the main customer, you become the product for advertisers. The "deep packet inspection" protocols for throttling and curtailing the use of their service by ISPs becomes a means to gather data for advertisers.

To explain this allow me a slight diversion to cable TV. As crazy as it may seem today, initially, cable was advertised as a way to get away from advertisement. You paid your monthly fee and that higher fee allowed you to watch ad-free TV. And for a while, cable TV was actually ad free. But as more and more customers came to demand cable TV the cable companies turned to advertisers to gain more profit, and slowly but surely advertisement crept back into cable TV.

Even worse, the cable packages allowed the selling of specialised packages of TV channels to customers, though now the customers were advertisers. Cable providers began slicing their channel options into select packages, not as a means for offering better content to the customer at home, but to offer a better product to advertisers. By selling sports package **X** focused on equestrian sports the cable company can then charge equestrian advertisers *more* to show ads to the viewers of this package. What's the problem here? You have paid for your access to cable TV, but the cable company, often synonymous with an ISP today, has now sold your channel selection to the highest bidder for advertisement, you are no longer a customer, in the cable companies eyes, you are the product for the real market: advertisement, the very thing they said cable TV was sold against.

Now, let's return to the internet. I know of no ISP that prides itself on delivering ads. To the public they will say, we are "information services" and content providers.

But the moves to disrupt net neutrality are all focused on personal information and advertisement. Slicing the internet into cable TV-like packages allows the same practice in cable TV to come to the internet: you are no longer the customer, you and your personal information are the product. If that sounds too crazy to be true, recent phone calls between AT&T and Time Warner over their proposed merger have focused on the possibilities of ["personalized advertisement" on TV and on the internet through At&T's rich data reserves](http://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/27/business/media/targeted-advertising-time-warner-merger.html); "personalized advertisement" being a weasel word for "advertisement founded on the use of your information."

[Thankfully, the US government recently passed a sweeping law expressly stopping ISPs selling personal data without permission (nonetheless they are still allowed to store personal data).](http://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/29/business/media/telecoms-ambitions-on-targeted-ads-seen-curbed-by-fccs-new-privacy-rules.html) Such a law remains absent in Canada. It is sorely needed.

The simple fact of the matter, though, is that when a merger occurs and a trust is formed that acts in a predatory manner to consumers and competitors, which seeks rents rather than improve service and its product, the government and the people must stay vigilant and if needed break up the trust and merger. We've done it before with the vertically integrated movie business, with Standard Oil Co., and with Ma Bell. Strong regulation that has teeth, which ensures the public good of a neutral net free from extortion and the invasion of privacy, must fight to protect the public. In the absence of that, we must stay vigilant and endlessly repeat to our representatives that net neutrality is needed now and forever more.

## Conclusion

The issue of net neutrality forces us to look at how we use the internet. Ultimately, the future of business is online, and that future is not distant but now. I hope this essay has emphasised how maintaining net neutrality is not just something good, it's fundamentally necessary if we want the internet to thrive, for all its benefits of a more connected and communicative world, new markets, and innovative businesses and content, to be open to all. We must not allow the internet to become an internet of privilege.

To do this we must not lose the debate over whether ISPs are as their name describes, service providers and passive members in the functioning of the internet, or, as "content providers" and active members in the functioning of the internet, effectively, middle-men. They are service providers, telecommunications companies, and common carriers. All their media consolidations, their mergers with content companies into media trusts and empires, cannot hide the fact that ISPs offer one service: access to dumb tubes. That is their service we pay for and nothing else.
